# Lesson Plan \>

**Lesson ID:** PROG3017-1-10

**Faculty Member:** Sean Morrow

**Subject:** PROG3017 Full Stack Programming

**Content:**

- Adding New Component to Portfolio

- Routed Components

**Prerequisites:**

- !!! Hand out Project I

- !!! Warning : starting project files contains previous challenge
- solution

**Announcements:**

- None Required

## Instructional Procedures:

ADDING NEW COMPONENT TO PORTFOLIO

- start off by adding a third view to the portfolio web app -- random
view

	- has a button that randomly selects a sample to display

	- display of sample is same as selected view

- demo to students with /portfolio-react:

	- go over challenge solution implementing radio buttons in App.tsx

	- added state variable "view"

	- added onClick inline event to all radio buttons

	- point out arrow function used to avoid having to add event handler
above

	- point out ternary operator to determine what visible component
property should be set to (true/false)

	- copy over RandomView.tsx to /client/src/RandomView

	- go over RandomView.tsx

	- point out missing selected state variable - SelectedView component
uses same approach

	- need to add functionality, but first integrate component into
App.tsx

	- add import of component to top of App.tsx:

import RandomView from \"./RandomView/RandomView\";

	- add radio button for RandomView to JSX:

\<input name=\"view\" type=\"radio\" className=\"mx-1.5\" value=\"3\"
onClick={() =- setView(3)} /\>Random

	- add component to JSX below others:

\<RandomView samples={samples} visible={view === 3 ? true : false} /\>

	- the RandomView will need access to the samples state variable
(collection of portfolio samples)

	- will also use the visible component property to make it show/hide

	- add component properties to RandomView.tsx:

const RandomView = ({samples, visible}:ViewProps) =- {

	- point out can re-use the ViewProps interface defined in
tools/Samples.model.ts -- import to top:

import { Sample, ViewProps } from \"./../tools/Samples.model\";

	- point out also importing Sample interface for later use

	- add temporary selected state variable declaration:

const \[selected, setSelected\] =
React.useState\<Sample\>(samples\[0\]);

	- point out using Sample datatype for selected state variable

	- add React inline styling to root \<div\> of JSX to make component
hide or show based on visible component property:

\<div className=\"flex flex-wrap\" style={{display: (visible ?
\'flex\' : \'none\')}}\>

	- need randomly select sample instead of the first sample in samples

	- import getRandom() from Toolkit:

import { getRandom } from \"./../tools/Toolkit\";

	- modify state variable declaration to use getRandom():

const \[selected, setSelected\] =
React.useState\<Sample\>(samples\[getRandom(0, samples.length - 1)\]);

	- run web app

	- last step is to get the button to randomly pick another portfolio
sample

	- add inline event to button:

\<input type=\"button\" value=\"Surprise Me!\" className=\"bg-white
text-\[#035074\] p-2 rounded-md active:bg-\[#EEAA40\]\"
onClick={onRandom} /\>

	- add event handler to RandomView.tsx:

//
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--
event handlers

const onRandom = (e:any) =- {

// randomly select index of sample

let index:number = getRandom(0, samples.length - 1);

// update state variable which forces a render of all components

setSelected(samples\[index\]);

}

	- run web app

ROUTED COMPONENTS

- can target a component to render based on URL routing

	- why? allows bookmarking a client-side web app

	- are called routed components

- will migrate over the portfolio web app to use routed components

- demo to students with /portfolio-react:

	- need to import a set of components (BrowserRouter / Routes / Route)

	- shut down docker:

docker-compose down -v

	- change directory to client folder:

cd client

	- run commands to import components and their datatypes for
typescript:

npm install react-router-dom \--save

npm install \@types/react-router-dom \--save

	- fire up docker again and rebuild images:

docker-compose up \--build

	- the View components (SelectedView, RandomView, AllView) will become
"routed components"

	- are nested components of App

	- in order to support routed components, the App component needs to
be wrapped in \<BrowserRouter- component

	- add import to index.tsx:

import { BrowserRouter } from \'react-router-dom\';

	- add component:

ReactDOM.render(

\<React.StrictMode\>

\<BrowserRouter\>

\<App/\>

\</BrowserRouter\>

\</React.StrictMode\>,

document.getElementById(\'root\')

);

	- add import of two components to top of App.tsx:

import { Route, Routes } from \'react-router-dom\';

	- to setup components to be routed, we wrap them in \<Routes\>
component in JSX

	- add to JSX around three view component elements (AllView,
SelectedView, RandomView):

\<Routes\>

...

\</Routes\>

	- \<Routes- ensures that only one component is rendered at a time

	- comment out three component elements and replace with:

\<Route

path=\'/selected\'

element={\<SelectedView samples={samples} /\>}

/\>

\<Route

path=\'/all\'

element={\<AllView samples={samples} /\>}

/\>

\<Route

path=\'/random\'

element={\<RandomView samples={samples} /\>}

/\>

	- the Route component element defines what is rendered out when the
path (URL routing) is hit

	- point out element property is set to the JSX to be rendered out

	- point out visible state variable no longer used -- adjustments
needed:

	- remove visible argument from all three View components

	- remove style attribute from outer most \<div\> of all three View
component's JSX

	- remove visible from ViewProps interface of Samples.model.ts

	- run web app and hit it with localhost:3000/selected and /random and
/all

	- open React \*components panel and point out nested components that
have been introduced

	- point out the components are unmounted when not visible

	- avoided this with Controls component of /QuoteGenerator because the
Controls component had a dropdown / checkbox that needed to have their
state preserved

	- /portfolio-react developed originally with none of these unmounting
which makes all controls retain state across renderings

	- due to unmounting we are choosing all components to "reset" when
made visible (since they are re-mounted) which means all controls will
be reset

	- this is ok in this app that the components reset

	- i.e. random component will select a new random sample when made
visible each time

	- can add a catchall that runs when hitting localhost:3000

	- add to top of \<Routes\>:

\<Route

path=\'/\'

element={\<SelectedView samples={samples} /\>}

/\>

	- point out path is "/"

	- run web app

	- an error component can handle any other URL routing is entered but
doesn't exist

	- copy Error.tsx to /src/Error

	- import component at top of App.tsx:

import Error from \"./Error/Error\";

	- add final \<Route- component to bottom of \<Routes\>:

\<Route path=\'/\*\' element={\<Error /\>} /\>

	- run web app with non-existent URL routing

- the addition of routed components is useful -- but the "view" state
variable is no longer used with the radio buttons (not working)

- when radio buttons are selected, now must navigate to required
routing

- demo to students with /portfolio-react:

	- first, finish removing all traces of "view" state variable

	- delete view state variable declaration

	- to navigate to a targeted URL routing and to find out what routing
we are currently on we use two new hooks

	- add imports to App.tsx:

import { useNavigate, useLocation } from \'react-router-dom\';

	- the useNavigate hook returns a function that lets you navigate
programmatically by accessing the browser's history

	- add to top of App():

const navigate:Function = useNavigate();

	- modify radio button onClick inline events:

\<input name=\"view\" className=\"mx-1.5\" type=\"radio\" value=\"1\"
defaultChecked onClick={() =- navigate(\"/selected\")} /\>Selected

\<input name=\"view\" className=\"mx-1.5\" type=\"radio\" value=\"2\"
onClick={() =- navigate(\"/all\")} /\>All

\<input name=\"view\" type=\"radio\" className=\"mx-1.5\" value=\"3\"
onClick={() =- navigate(\"/random\")} /\>Random

	- point out argument of URL routing to targeted component to navigate
to

	- run web app

	- point out URL routing changing with radio button clicks

- one last bug -- when you hit the web app with a URL routing the radio
buttons do not reflect the current view (Selected / All / Random)

- demo to students with /portfolio-react:

	- need to know where we are (in terms of URL routing)

	- add to App() below useNavigate() hook:

const location:string = useLocation().pathname;

	- returns the current location object of the browser (part of DOM)
which is used to find the current URL via pathname property

	- point out first radio button has defaultChecked so is selected by
default

	- need to adjust so others are defaultChecked if hit with specific
URL routing

	- modify/add defaultChecked property to radio buttons:

defaultChecked={location === \"/selected\" \|\| location === \"/\" ?
true : false}

...

defaultChecked={location === \"/all\" ? true : false}

...

defaultChecked={location === \"/random\" ? true : false}

	- run web app

	- point out radio buttons reflecting targeted URL routing when
hitting web app

CHALLENGE : Add Search View to Portfolio

- let's do one last update to the Portfolio web app and add a Search
view component

- starting with the provided SearchView.tsx, you will see that the
component renders out a textbox (to enter what you are searching for)
along with a Search button to submit it

- essentially, the SearchView component is exactly the same as the
RandomView component except the sample displayed is found through a
search instead of random

- note we have never worked with textboxes before in a react web app.
The best approach is to add an onChange inline event handler that
updates a state variable as the user types. This way the input is
preserved in the state variable and will not be lost across renders

- when the user clicks the Search button, the web app should search for
the first portfolio sample whose name contains whatever was entered into
the textbox. For example, if the user enters in ASP, then the *ASP.NET
Core Web App* portfolio sample should be displayed. Note that case
should not matter.

- if there is no match found then it should display "No matches
found..."

- it is ok for the component to display "No matches found..." initially
(before entering any search) since the textbox will be blank by default

- this challenge is worth 3 tickies

\[Marks Breakdown\]

#/0.5 adding radio button / route for SearchView component on App (root
component)

#/1 search displays "No matches found..." when nonsense entered or empty
textbox

#/1.5 searching for match and displaying sample data

**Materials and Equipment**

- /portfolio-react (PROVIDED)

- /portfolio-react-done

- RandomView.tsx (PROVIDED)

- Error.tsx (PROVIDED)

- SearchView.tsx (PROVIDED)
