# Lesson Plan \>

**Lesson ID:** PROG3017-1-8

**Faculty Member:** Sean Morrow

**Subject:** PROG3017 Full Stack Programming

**Content:**

- In-Class Challenge

**Prerequisites:**

- None Required

**Announcements:**

- None Required

## Instructional Procedures:

CHALLENGE : Pizzaria Delivery App Migration

- we have spent the last few lessons porting over the Quote Generator
app from a Vanilla JS app to a React app -- now it's your turn!

- starting with the provided pizzariaDelivery web app, complete the
migration from Vanilla JS to React

- the final React app should look and work the same

- some things to note:

-   Build your starting project folder by cloning the PROG3017
    boilerplate git repo with command:

git clone
https://github.com/s3anmorrow/PROG3017-boilerplate-with-tailwind.git

-   This webapp does not require a container for the Web API. Like the
    Vanilla JS version, your react web app will use the public Web API
    on www.seanmorrow.ca

-   Spend some time running the original app using webpack to get a feel
    for how it works

-   Much like in our lessons, you are required to properly type the
    receiving JSON. You are not permitted to use the \<any- type
    *except* for event objects of event handlers

-   The received JSON contains a "delivered" property that is not
    currently used in this web app -- it can be ignored

-   The web app uses both google fonts and Font Awesome (the later will
    need to be installed: npm install \@fortawesome/fontawesome-free)
    You can import the font and CSS libraries in index.css or App.tsx

-   The original web app includes a CSS background image for the banner
    of the App component. Be sure to include this in your React web app!

-   The web app needs a loading overlay when the JSON data is being
    retrieved -- reuse your handy LoadingOverlay component developed
    last lesson!

-   The original web app includes some responsive design. Tailwind makes
    it easy to implement these without a stylesheet or media queries.
    The trick is design for mobile and then add different prefixes to
    apply style utilities for different screen sizes. See
    <https://tailwindcss.com/docs/responsive-designfor details

- this challenge is worth 4 tickies

- see /pizzaria-delivery-app-react for solution

Mark Breakdown:

#/1 loading overlay component on JSON load

#/0.5 font awesome social icons implemented

#/1 root App Component (state variable / structure / rendering
PizzaOrders component with map())

#/0.5 PizzaOrders Component (passing in properties / structure)

#/0.5 tailwind styling (CSS background image in banner)

#/0.5 responsiveness via Tailwind

**Materials and Equipment**

- /pizzariaDeliveryApp (PROVIDED)

- /pizzaria-delivery-app-react
