# Lesson Plan \>

**Lesson ID:** PROG3017 1-7

**Faculty Member:** Sean Morrow

**Subject:** PROG3017 Full Stack Programming

**Content:**

- Completing QuoteGenerator Migration

- Component Lifecycle Hooks

- Retrieving JSON from a Web API with useRef

- Avoiding the Use of Any

- Better Component Property Data Typing

- Custom Styling with Tailwind

- Implementing Loading Overlay

**Prerequisites:**

- React.js Essential Training (linkedin learning)

- Unit 5-1 / 5-2

- <https://dev.to/trentyang/replace-lifecycle-with-hooks-in-react-3d4n>

- <https://www.carlrippon.com/typed-usestate-with-typescript/>

**Announcements:**

- !!! provide docker-compose.yml to copy into project folder for this
- lesson

- !!! Warning : Challenge solution in starting files

## Instructional Procedures:

COMPLETING QUOTE GENERATOR MIGRATION

- we spent last two lessons porting the /quoteGenerator SPA to a React
web app

	- really fast to get a SPA up and running with little code

	- also added some new features to quoteGenerator (toggle quote URLs /
select number of quotes)

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- review code / structure

	- review challenge solution:

	- point out passing in showToggle state variable / set method into
Controls component

	- point out ternary operator to adjust checkbox label in Controls
component

- biggest thing to address:

	- quote data is still hard coded in component class

	- should retrieve JSON data from Web API running in docker container

- in original quoteGenerator the request to get the quote data is sent
when web app starts up in the main() method

- will continue to retrieve data using getJSONData() in the React web
app

- but where to put it?

HACKING LIFECYCLE HOOKS WITH FUNCTION COMPONENTS

- might think it should be inside the App() function of the App
component

- this function runs on *every* re-render of the web app

	- renders happen when state variables change

	- we don't want to retrieve the data over and over again -- only
once!

- in React, components go through different stages in their lifecycle

- can listen for these stages and do things in response using Hooks
(are several)

- two of the more useful hooks for component life cycle are:

componentDidMount()

	- will refer to as the mount stage

	- after component is first mounted (constructed) and its output is
rendered to the DOM (renders to virtual DOM first)

	- useful for initialization work

componentDidUpdate()

	- will refer to as the update stage

	- right after the component's output renders to the DOM during
re-render

=- See React component lifecycle diagram:

<https://projects.wojtekmaj.pl/react-lifecycle-methods-diagram/>

- Problem: lifecycle hooks were implemented for use with class
components!

	- in class components you add the hook functions right into the class

	- for function components, we can hack it using the useEffect() hook

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- add to App() of App.tsx:

// lifecycle hooks demonstration

React.useEffect(() =- console.log(\'componentDidMount\'), \[\]);

React.useEffect(() =- console.log(\'componentDidUpdate\'));

	- recall useEffect() is used to run a callback when a state variable
changes (defined in dependency array -- second argument)

	- it runs the function after components output is rendered to DOM

	- if you pass in an empty dependency array it will run when the
component has successfully mounted (on web app startup)

	- hacking the componentDidMount stage

	- if no second argument useEffect() will run after EVERY render of
the component

	- hacking the componentDidUpdate stage - sort of because it also does
the componentDidMount stage as well

	- run web app

	- on first hit:

	- mount stage once and update stage twice -- why?

	- first update stage is because the useEffect() runs it on mount

	- second update stage is useEffect for quoteCount setting the
quotesSelected state variable forcing a re-render

	- on subsequent hits:

	- demo to changing links to hidden

	- update stage only once

	- demo by changing number of quotes

	- update stage happens twice -- why?

	- first update stage is from updating quoteCount state variable

	- second update stage is useEffect for quoteCount setting the
quotesSelected state variable forcing a re-render

RETRIEVING JSON FROM WEB API WITH USEREF

- the App's componentDidMount stage happens once in lifetime of the
component (on web app start up usually)

- is the best place to request the JSON from the web API

- remember the request / response of the data is an asynchronous
operation

	- it will happen, but we don't know exactly when it will complete
(i.e. requesting JSON data from public API)

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- comment out two lifecycle stage console.log demos in App.tsx

	- modify import to include getJSONData() from Toolkit.ts:

import { getJSONData, getRandom } from \"./tools/Toolkit\";

	- add constant to top of App() for Web API URL:

const QUOTES_WEB_API:string = \"http://localhost/getQuotes.php\";

	- add to App():

// lifecycle hooks

React.useEffect(() =- {

console.log(\'App componentDidMount\');

// loading JSON data when root component mounts

getJSONData(QUOTES_WEB_API, onResponse, onError);

}, \[\]);

	- add event handlers below onToggleControls():

const onResponse = (result:any) =- {

console.table(result);

};

const onError = (message:string) =- {

console.log(\"\*\*\* Error has occurred during AJAX data transmission:
\" + message);

};

	- run web app

- next step is to populate quotesArchive from received JSON data

- currently data is hard coded as a global constant

- global variables outside a component's function is not recommended as
they pollute global scope (any other JS that has a quotesArchive will
overwrite)

- could move quotesArchive inside App() to be local, but need to
populate this variable and have it persist throughout app's life (used
on every re-render)

- state variable is also not solution as quotesArchive is only set once
(on component mount) and is not used in the JSX directly (like
quotesSelected)

- solution is a new hook called useRef()

	- useRef() is similar to useState() as it creates a reference
variable that persists for lifetime of the component

	- doesn't trigger a re-rendering of component

	- is synchronous -- updated immediately!

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- delete quotesArchive const / add below useState() statements in
App():

const quotesArchive = React.useRef\<any\>(\[\]);

	- add at bottom of onResponse():

// set quotesArchive to returned JSON from Web API response

quotesArchive.current = result;

setQuotesSelected(refreshQuotes(quoteCount));

	- point out to access value of reference variable via .current
property

	- modify statement in refreshQuotes() to use current property:

let quotesPool:any = Object.assign(\[\], quotesArchive.current);

	- run web app

	- point out error in map() of JSX

	- before the JSON data is loaded via component mounting useEffect(),
the quoteCount useEffect() runs first and calls refreshQuotes()

	- at this point quotesArchive array is empty

	- as a result refreshQuotes returns an array of undefined elements
which crashes the map() on re-render

	- need to modify refreshQuotes() to handle this case -- add to top:

if (quotesArchive.current.length \<= 0) return \[\];

	- run web app

	- an ESlint warning "React.useEffect has a missing dependency"
appears in VS Code on the Lifecycle hook UseEffect

	- code inside useEffect is relying on other function onResponse()

	- warning requires be listed as a dependency

	- if functions added to dependency array, get infinite loop as every
re-render constructs a new function (object) different from before
which invokes the useEffect again

	- can be addressed with complicated useCallback hook, but for this
course, disable warning

	- add to top of App.tsx:

/\* eslint-disable react-hooks/exhaustive-deps \*/

	- run web app

AVOIDING THE USE OF ANY

- over last couple lessons we used the "any" datatype for the quote
JSON data

- defeats the purpose of Typescript to use "any" -- won't catch errors

	- also, if JSON has multiple levels deep of objects, Typescript might
not even compile with "any"

- let's fix this and avoid using any

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- need to typecast quotesArchive to a datatype other than any -- but
what?

	- requires defining a separate class that will be the data type of
the received JSON object (data)

	- a major undertaking -- but there is a shortcut!

	- view JSON response in browser by hitting
http://localhost/getQuotes.php

	- copy the JSON response (make sure it is raw JSON)

	- install Paste JSON as Code extension (by Quicktype) into VS Code

	- create a new file src/tools/quotes.model.ts and put cursor in empty
file

	- open command palette (CTRL/COMMAND+SHIFT+P)

	- find "Paste JSON as Code"

	- enter name of top level type name to "Quote"

	- extension generates the Typescript in quotes.model.ts

	- generated the class definition that matches JSON in clipboard

	- technically created the interface (classes that are made up of
abstract properties and methods)

	- warning : HTML entities in JSON data might break this?

	- alternative to extension -- there are web apps that do this

	- to use this in App component we need to import it

	- add to top of App.tsx:

import { Quote } from \"./tools/quotes.model\";

	- modify all array declarations that use any in App.tsx:

let quotesArchive:Quote\[\] = \[\];

...

let quotesPool:Quote\[\] = Object.assign(\[\], quotesArchive.current);

...

let quotesSelectedFromPool:Quote\[\] = \[\];

...

const onResponse = (result:Quote\[\]) =- {

...

const \[quotesSelected, setQuotesSelected\] =
React.useState\<Quote\[\]\>(\[\]);

...

const quotesArchive = React.useRef\<Quote\[\]\>(\[\]);

\...

\<div className=\"content\"\>

{quotesSelected.map(

(quoteData:Quote) =\>

	- point out properly datatyped instead of any

	- from now on, "any" datatypes only allowed on event objects of event
handlers

	- run web app

BETTER COMPONENT PROPERTY DATA TYPING

- with larger react web apps it's easy to see how the number of state
variables and component properties can get unmanageable

- JS libraries like React Redux help solve this issue (not covered in
course)

- there are some things we can do to help with component properties

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react

	- with typescript the datatyping of the received props array of a
component can get long

	- point out Controls() of Controls.tsx props array argument

	- with inclusion of quotes.model.ts we can define the datatype of the
component properties

	- add to quotes.model.ts:

export interface ContentProps {

message:string;

author:string;

link:string;

}

export interface ControlProps {

setQuoteCount:Function;

setShowLinks:Function;

showLinks:boolean;

visible:boolean;

}

	- modify Controls() declaration to:

import { ControlProps } from \"./../tools/quotes.model\";

...

const Controls = ({setQuoteCount, setShowLinks, showLinks,
visible}:ControlProps) =- { ...

	- modify Content() declaration to:

import { ContentProps } from \"./../tools/quotes.model\";

...

const Content = ({ message, author, link }:ContentProps) =- { ...

	- run web app

- notice that the web app shows an empty interface for a moment while
the JSON data is loaded

- the final step (your challenge) is to implement a loading overlay to
cover this up

CUSTOM STYLING WITH TAILWIND

- tailwind is very versatile, but when it comes to colors and fonts,
often have to custom it by adding your own style utilities

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- add 'Montserrat' google font to index.css:

\@import
url(\'https://fonts.googleapis.com/css2?family=Montserrat:wght@500&display=swap\');

	- to use, you need to add a custom style utility -- add to
tailwind.config.js:

theme {

extend: {

fontFamily: {

\"title\": \[\"Montserrat\", \"sans-serif\"\]

},

...

	- point out extending the font utility with custom font family

	- add / modify style classes of \<header- in App.tsx:

className=\"... text-2xl font-title ...\"

	- run working web app

	- change \<header- to a custom color -- modify \<header\>:

\<header className=\"\... text-\[#015c8b\] \...\"
onClick={onToggleControls}\>

	- point out custom property with square brackets

	- run working web app

	- we will want the dropdown / checkbox in Controls.tsx to be same
color

	- can add a custom style utility for this color much like font

	- add below fontFamily in tailwind.config.js:

colors: {

\"grey-blue\": \"#015c8b\",

\"grey-blue-hover\": \"#0180c2\"

}

	- modify \<header- in App.tsx:

\<header className=\"\... text-grey-blue \...\"
onClick={onToggleControls}\>

	- modify \<select- in Controls.tsx:

className=\"bg-grey-blue hover:bg-grey-blue-hover ...

	- modify checkbox \<input- in controls..tsx:

className=\"... accent-grey-blue hover:accent-grey-blue-hover\"

	- run working web app

	- point out addition of /lib folder in react web app /src

	- want to add a light watermark behind the quotes on the page

	- needs to be done via CSS -- tailwind can do this with custom
properties

	- modify \<div\> below \<Controls- in App.tsx:

\<div className=\"\... bg-\[url(\'./lib/quote.png\')\] bg-no-repeat
bg-center\"\>

	- run working web app

CHALLENGE : The Missing Loading Screen

- the Quote Generator is almost complete! All that is left is to
implement a loading screen to cover up the interface while it fetches
the JSON data from the Web API

- we know that the reusability and modular structure of components is
one of the best features of React -- a loading overlay would make an
ideal component!

- your challenge is to develop a new component called LoadingOverlay
and add it into the /quote-generator-react web app to add a loading
screen

- in this app, the loading screen will only be enabled once on startup
when the JSON data is retrieved

- the component will use a React JS library called Spinners-React to
generate the animated spinner (see
https://www.npmjs.com/package/spinners-react for details). To add this
to your React app run the following command in /client folder:

-   npm install spinners-react \--save

This will add Spinners-React dependency to /node_modules. Note that you
will need to remove all docker containers / volumes and rebuild the
images after adding this library

- this new library simply adds a new component into your project called
\<SpinnerCircular\>. To use it you will need to include the following
import in your LoadingOverlay component:

-   import { SpinnerCircular } from \'spinners-react\';

- the LoadingOverlay must cover the entire web app and its spinner must
be centered horizontal and vertical (use flexbox utilities: flex /
justify-center / items-center). All styling must be done with Tailwind
CSS

- the LoadingOverlay component must be versatile for future use.
Include the following component properties:

-   enabled

whether the loading overlay is visible or not

-   bgColor

the background color of the loading overlay

-   spinnerColor

the spinner color of the loading overlay

- as a bit of extra guidance, this is what your LoadingOverlay
component will look like in the JSX of App:

\<LoadingOverlay spinnerColor=\"#FFFFFF\" bgColor=\"#428BCA\"
enabled={Boolean to indicate if it is visible or not} /\>

- this challenge is worth 3 tickies

- see /quote-generator-react for solution

Mark Breakdown:

#/1 LoadingOverlay component styled and implemented in root component
App

#/1 three component properties implemented and working

#/1 LoadingOverlay component enabled / disabled with state variable in
App

**Materials and Equipment**

- /quote-generator-react (PROVIDED)

- /quote-generator-react-done
