# Lesson Plan \>

**Lesson ID:** PROG3017-1-6

**Faculty Member:** Sean Morrow

**Subject:** PROG3017 Full Stack Programming

**Content:**

- Wiring up Events

- Adding State with useState Hook

- Watching State with useEffect Hook

**Prerequisites:**

- React.js Essential Training (Linkedin learning)

- Unit 4 / 5-4 / 5-5

- <https://upmostly.com/tutorials/react-onclick-event-handling-with-examples>

- <https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-state.html>

<https://www.robinwieruch.de/react-function-component#react-function-component-event-handler>

- <https://linguinecode.com/post/why-react-setstate-usestate-does-not-update-immediately>

**Announcements:**

- !!! Warning : Starting files contain challenge solution

## Instructional Procedures:

WIRING UP EVENTS

- we are still missing a few features of original Quote Generator
(retrieving JSON from actual Web API / loading screen / etc.)

	- will implement these in the next lesson

- in the last challenge you added a new Controls component to provide
the UI for some new features:

	- a dropdown menu to specify how many quotes to display (1,3,5,10)

	- a checkbox control to show/hide the links on each quote

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- open Controls.tsx

	- point out returning JSX

	- point out defaultValue / defaultChecked to set default value of
controls (specific JSX attribute much like className)

	- note the camelback (common in JSX)

	- another example is maxLength={10} for textbox controls

	- point out htmlFor attribute on \<label- as "for" is a reserved
keyword in JS

	- run web app with "docker-compose up \--build" (requires Docker
running)

	- open console and point out three random quotes selected

	- ignore double sets of quotes in console due to \<React.StrictMode\>
in App root component

	- how do we run code in response to user interacting with controls?

	- with Vanilla JS we would use addEventListener():

	- the page is created in the DOM and then events are wired up to
controls / elements afterwards with JS

	- with React, a virtual DOM is updated and then the actual DOM

	- as a result, is more efficient to setup event listeners as the
elements are initially rendered

	- is done by using inline attributes in JSX

	- add to checkbox control in Controls.tsx:

\<input id=\"chkLinks\" type=\"checkbox\" onChange={onLinksChange} \...

	- add event handler above:

const onLinksChange = (e:any) =- {

console.log(\"links changed!\");

};

	- point out the inline attribute uses interpolation to target the
event handler

	- warning: is NOT written onChange={onLinksChange()}

	- must be the function name only

	- point out event handler is inside Controls() function

	- point out event object of event handler with datatype any

	- we have been trying to avoid using this catch all of typescript

	- the event object can be one of many types of objects

	- for simplicity in learning, will allow this use of "any" for event
objects only in this course

	- will fix "any" used elsewhere in code next lesson

	- run web app

	- event handlers are not required if you use arrow functions

	- comment out checkbox \<input /- element and replace with:

\<input id=\"chkLinks\" type=\"checkbox\" defaultChecked onChange={()
=- console.log(\"links changed!\")} \...

	- is a shorthand approach if event handler only has one statement

	- add other inline event listener:

\<select id=\"mnuQuoteCount\" defaultValue=\"3\"
onChange={onCountChange} \...

	- add other event handler:

const onCountChange = (e:any) =- {

console.log(\"count changed!\");

};

	- run web app

ADDING STATE WITH USESTATE HOOK

- we can't continue until we address an issue

- because of the controls, we need to keep track of data regarding them

- there are two issues with this when using React function components:

1\) variables declared in our function components are local:

	- on every re-render the component function is run again and thus
variable will be re-declared / initialized

	- also when function is finished the variable is lost out of memory

	- point out quotesSelected variable of App.tsx

	- has not given us trouble because the web app does no re-renders and
thus quotesSelected only used once

2\) the way React components are rendered:

	- recall that components always return JSX which is rendered onto the
web app page

	- if the JSX includes the value of a variable, if the variable
changes value you need a re-render for the web app page to update and
show change

	- local variables do not force a re-render of the component

- React has added a feature that addresses both issues -- useState hook

	- a hook is a special function that lets you "hook into" React
features

	- useState() is a function to declare a variable in function
components that will persist throughout the runtime of the web app

	- we call it a state variable

	- it also forces a re-render of the component when the value is
changed

	- the scope is component based (not global)

	- GOTCHA! Note that setting state variables is asynchronous and thus
not instantaneous (more later)

- So - when do you use local variables and when do you use useState()?

	- Golden Rule: if you use the variable in the JSX (or effects the
rendering of the JSX) of the component AND its value needs to persist
across re-renders, it should be stored in the state using useState()

	- if the variable does not need to be preserved and can be reset
every render then it can be a local variable (this is the current case
for quotesSelected)

	- quotesArchive is breaking rules for testing purposes -- fixed later

- to demo useState() let's add an easier feature

- ability to hide and show the controls when clicking the web app's
header

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- need to store data on whether controls are show or not -- and must
persist across re-renders

	- we need to put it in a state variable!

	- add event listener to header of App.tsx:

\<header className=\"font-bold text-xl pb-3\"
onClick={onToggleControls}\>\_Quote Generator\</header\>

	- add event handler:

//
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--
event handlers

const onToggleControls = (e:any) =- {

}

	- need to initialize the showControls state variable using useState()

	- add just above return():

const \[showControls, setShowControls\] =
React.useState\<boolean\>(false);

	- React.useState() returns an array of the state variable's name and
the set function to change it (which forces re-render of component)

	- uses array de-structuring to break it into a variable and a
function

	- point out useState() implements a generic where you specify the
datatype of the state variable

	- point out useState()'s argument is default value

	- if left empty variable is initialized to undefined

	- useState() only declares / initializes state variable once -- when
component function called again for re-render it is not done again

	- add to onToggleControls() event handler:

setShowControls(!showControls);

	- run web app

	- open console in chrome and go to \*components and select App
component

	- new tabs in console thanks to React Developer Tools Extension

	- point out all its nested components

	- point out hooks section and click on the header on web app to show
value toggling (click magic wand to see name of variable)

	- this is the best tool for watching your state variables (better
than console.log) because they are asynchronously updated

	- let's now use the showControls state variable

	- need to modify JSX so controls component is hidden / shown

	- replace \<Controls /- with ternary operator:

{

showControls

? \<Controls /\>

: \"\"

}

	- this is another example of conditional rendering

	- run web app

	- this seems to work fine but worth noting something

	- when Controls panel is hidden, component is not on DOM at all

	- referred as "component unmounting" (more on this next lesson)

	- can see this in action in the React \*components panel of browser

	- while the component unmounting and mounting again is fine -- with
certain apps it may cause a problem

	- in our example Controls component contains user controls

	- state of controls will be reset every time component mounted again

	- not only this, if it had state variables, they would be lost on
unmount and reinitialized on mount

- the solution is to add a visible property to the component

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- adjust JSX of App.tsx:

\<Controls visible={showControls} /\>

	- add property to Controls() in Controls.tsx using object
de-structuring:

const Controls = ({visible}:{visible:boolean}) =- {

	- adjust root \<div\> of JSX of Controls.tsx:

\<div className=\"mb-4\" style={{display: (visible ? \'block\' :
\'none\')}}\>

	- why the double {{ ... }} for interpolation?

	- in JSX to set styles you need to set the style attribute to an
object with property/values for styling

	- is called React inline styling and we did this in a previous lesson

	- the inner { } is the object declaration

	- run web app

	- because quote generator title is now clickable if user clicks on it
multiple times it may become selected

	- disable by adding a tailwind utility:

\<header className=\"font-bold text-xl pb-3 select-none\"
onClick={onToggleControls}\>\_Quote Generator\</header\>

	- run web app

- there is a bug!

- when controls are shown / hidden a re-render is forced (because
showControls state variable changed) which runs all the component
functions again

- quotesSelected local variable is re-initialize via refreshQuotes()
again!

- quotesSelected is good contender for a state variable -- needs to
persist across renders and is used in the JSX

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- remove declaration of quotesSelected variable and replace with:

const \[quotesSelected, setQuotesSelected\] =
React.useState\<any\>(refreshQuotes(3));

	- run web app and point out state variable in \*components debug
panel

- the only time this state variable should change is when a new number
of quotes is selected from Controls drop down menu

WATCHING STATE WITH USEEFFECT HOOK

- a major gotcha of state variables

	- using set method of state variables doesn't update its value
instantly

	- are put in a queue to be updated after the next render of the
component (but it forces a render of the component as well)

	- in other words -- state variables are asynchronous

- let's see this in action!

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- add a console.log inside onToggleControls() event handler after
setting the showControls state variable:

// this console.log does not display what we think it should display!

console.log(\"showControls -- this is not changed: \" + showControls);

	- run web app and point out showControls value is not being updated!

	- can also see this behaviour in React Developer Tools extension in
browser when looking at state variable in \*components panel

	- it takes a moment to update! Can see it right in the panel!

	- sometimes your web app needs to do some code when a state variable
changes after the render - we call the code an "effect"

	- can watch a state variable for changes with the useEffect() hook

	- add to App() just above return:

React.useEffect(() =- {

console.log(\"showControls - now it has changed: \" + showControls);

},\[showControls\]);

	- first argument is the callback function to run when change occurs

	- second argument is array of state variables to watch for changes
(can be more than one) -- called the dependency array

	- run web app

- let's implement useEffect() to get the dropdown menu working

- first, the number of quotes needs to be preserved as a state variable

- when that number gets set, a re-render will be forced

- demo to students with /quote-generator-react:

	- quoteCount use is directly tied to the JSX output and it needs to
persist

	- add state variable in App() for quoteCount above quotesSelected:

const \[quoteCount, setQuoteCount\] = React.useState\<number\>(3);

	- run web app and point out new state variable in \*components panel

	- the App component's quoteCount state variable needs to be adjusted
when the dropdown menu of Controls component is changed

	- don't have access to setQuoteCount() in Control component

	- we could declare the quoteCount state variable in Controls
component but when it is changed it will only re-render Controls
component

	- need it to re-render the App component and all nested components to
see new number of new quotes

	- one solution is pass in setQuoteCount() as property into Controls
component

	- adjust the \<Controls /- elements in JSX:

{

\<Controls setQuoteCount={setQuoteCount} visible={showControls} /\>

}

	- adjust props argument of Controls() in Controls.tsx:

const Controls = ({setQuoteCount, visible}:{setQuoteCount:Function,
visible:boolean}) =- {

	- point out setQuoteCount datatype set to Function

	- add to onCountChange() event handler:

const onCountChange = (e:any) =- {

setQuoteCount(Number(e.target.value));

};

	- point out using value of dropdown but need to convert to number

	- run web app and change quote count in drop down menu

	- point out \*components panel show quoteCount state variable being
updated

	- point out you can pass any function to another Component for use
via properties (not limited to state variable set methods)

	- the final step is to update the quotesSelected state variable to a
new set of quotes by calling refreshQuotes()

	- only want to do this when the quoteCount state variable changes

	- useEffect to the rescue -- add in App():

React.useEffect(() =- {

setQuotesSelected(refreshQuotes(quoteCount));

}, \[quoteCount\]);

	- run working web app

	- when web app is first hit the App component sets the quoteCount
state variable and the useEffect catches it

	- demo by adding console.log to useEffect():

React.useEffect(() =- {

console.log(\"quoteCount useEffect running\");

\...

	- since it sets the quoteSelected state variable, there is no need
initializing it with a call to refreshQuotes() -- can set to empty
array

	- change useState() statement to:

const \[quotesSelected, setQuotesSelected\] =
React.useState\<any\>(\[\]);

CHALLENGE : Hiding the Quote Links

- you may have noticed that the toggle links checkbox of the quote
generator currently does nothing!

- implement the quote link checkbox of the Control component to make
the quote's links appear and disappear

- for added usability, the label beside the checkbox should say
"Showing the links..." when the links are visible and "Hiding the
links..." when they are not visible

- see /quote-generator-react for solution

**Materials and Equipment**

- /quote-generator-react (PROVIDED)

- /quote-generator-react-done
