**Lesson Plan \>­­**

**Lesson ID:** PROG3017-1-3

**Faculty Member:** Sean Morrow

**Subject:** PROG3017 Full Stack Programming

**Content:**

- Introduction to MERN Stack

- React and Typescript

- Setup and Workflow

- React Elements­­­

- JSX and Interpolation

- Outputting with Map Method

- Conditional Rendering

**Prerequisites:**

- React.js Essential Training (LinkedIn learning)

- Unit 1 / 2 / 4-6 / 5-8

- <https://create-react-app.dev/docs/getting-started/>

- <https://blog.bitsrc.io/why-and-how-use-typescript-in-your-react-app-60e8987be8de>

**Announcements:**

- None Required

## Instructional Procedures:

INTRODUCTION TO MERN STACK

- first lesson explored the quoteGenerator web app which included:

	- client side web app (JS / HTML / CSS)

	- server side Web API (PHP)

	- could include MySQL, but left out for simplicity

- can develop web apps as only client side or server side (demoed in
Web App Programming I) -- but modern web apps are mix of both

- this collection of techs used can be called the "technology stack"
for the app

- each part is developed differently with different workflow /
language - big learning curve!

- MERN Stack solves this problem by developing everything with JS

- is an acronym for:

-   MongoDB as the database

-   Express.js as the web framework for the server side

-   React.js as the client side framework

-   Node.js as the server side platform

- sparked a new programmer profession called "Full Stack Programmer"

- will explore all four -- but will spend the next number of weeks on
React JS

- are variations such as MEAN stack (with Angular instead of React) or
SEAN stack (Sequalize instead of MongoDB)

REACT AND TYPESCRIPT

- React is a javascript framework (or library) that enables development
of SPAs (Single Page Applications) in less time with less code

- is open source

- developed (2013) by Facebook

- has many advantages than developing with Vanilla JS. Some features
are:

-   Component structure for cleaner code

- with react we build web apps out of reusable components (which can be
functions or classes) that display and work with data

-   Efficient execution

- most web apps do a lot of HTML DOM manipulation

	- Instead of doing it directly, React creates a virtual DOM in memory
and does all changes there and then updates HTML DOM in one update

-   Supports native development

	- can develop native apps (installable apps) such as mobile apps

-   Scalable to large web apps

- React can be written with a number of languages:

	- Javascript (ES5 or greater) / TypeScript

- we will be using TypeScript

	- is a superset of JavaScript (is JS with added features)

	- everything in JS still applies to Typescript

	- biggest difference is it is strict-data typed (hence name
TypeScript)

	- declare variables in TypeScript:

let myName:string = \"sean\";

	- why use Typescript when JS worked fine?

	- strict data typing eliminates common errors of Vanilla JS by
enforcing data typing throughout

	- enables VS Code to catch errors and make code suggestions

	- makes code more readable

	- must be trans-piled to ES5 so all browsers can run it (same as
using babel last semester)

	- open source language by Microsoft and popular with React devs

	- has extension .ts

	- typescript documentation <http://www.typescriptlang.org>

SETUP AND WORKFLOW

- to develop with React we need:

-   VS Code -- comes ready to code TypeScript by default

-   React Developer Tools Extension (by Facebook) for Chrome - adds
    components / profiler tabs to developer tools

-   Node.js / NPM (install latest version of each)

-   required dependencies in /node_modules (there is a lot)

- can setup a react project folder manually BUT for learning is
recommended to use the create-react-app tool:

	- builds a project folder and configures it for you

	- sets up webpack / babel (if needed) / a new git repo / etc.

	- sets up npm scripts to run the web app

	- automatically downloads and populates /node_modules

- let's create typical hello-world react web app

- open terminal in ubuntu workspace and enter:

npx create-react-app hello-world \--template typescript

- create-react-app creates the project folder by executing

	- npx is a package runner will run executables in the NPM registry

- point out name of project CANNOT have capitals (hence no camelback
used)

- point out template option to have it use typescript instead of JS

	- will add typescript dependencies to /node_modules

- to continue using docker we need to make a few changes:

	- create /client folder and copy all files (exclude .gitignore) into
it

	- will need to "cd client" and "npm install" in future

	- copy provided Dockerfile into /client (same as previous lessons)

	- copy provided docker-composer.yml into project folder root

	- see brightspace for current boilerplate github repo of the project
folder at <https://github.com/s3anmorrow/PROG3017-boilerplate>

- open /hello-world project with VS Code

	- change "/node_modules" to "node_modules" in .gitignore

- go over project folder structure in /client:

tsonfig.json -- config for typescript transpiling

/src -- where code goes: TSX (Typescript with JSX), CSS (or Sass),
etc.

/public -- the root index.html that react renders and icons, other
misc.

package.json -- defines npm scripts to startup the web app /
dependencies required for a React web app

- build container images and run:

docker-compose up \--build

- create-react-app sets up webpack with a local server and watcher

- hit web app with <http://localhost:3000>

- point out web app with spinning React logo (SVG)

- what happened on the my-client-server container?

	- webpack pulls all components of web app (only one), transpiles TS
and bundles, and spins up a local server for web app to run

	- the local server is exposed on port 3000 of the docker container

	- server could be spun up manually with "npm run start"

	- might notice that unlike /quoteGenerator, no /build is added and
populated with transpiled and bundled files

	- this is not the doing of docker - React hides these from the
developer

REACT ELEMENTS

- the default template of create-react-app has a single component

- components are too advanced at this point -- let's start from
scratch!

- we will code react to add a single HTML element to our web app

- demo to students with src/index.tsx:

	- comment out all contents of file

	- need to import two React JS libraries -- add to top:

import React from \'react\';

import ReactDOM from \"react-dom/client\";

	- point our React is just the React.JS library

	- point out ReactDOM provides us a way to write (or render) all our
changes to the HTML DOM

	- both libraries are listed as dependencies in package.json

	- add two string variables (second with your full name):

**let message:string = \"Hello World!\";**

**let name:string = \"Sean Morrow\";**

	- point out datatype added in variable declaration (TypeScript)

	- construct an element via React library:

const element:JSX.Element = React.createElement(

\"div\",

{id:\"title\", style:helloStyle},

message

);

	- point out React.createElement() returns a JSX.Element object

	- point out element is const to enforce it never gets re-pointed

	- common JS technique for any variable holding an object (didn't last
school year to avoid confusion)

	- createElement() method has three arguments:

element name we are creating / any attributes or settings for the
element / contents of the element

	- ultimately have created an HTML element in memory:

\<div id=\"title\"\>Hello World!\</div\>

	- has NOT been rendered onto the web app page yet (index.html)

	- add below:

const rootElement:HTMLElement = document.getElementById(\"root\") as
HTMLElement;

const root = ReactDOM.createRoot(rootElement);

root.render(element);

	- point out targeting node in HTML DOM requires a type assertion

	- getElementById() can return an HTMLElement object or null

	- rootElement is expecting an HTMLElement object so typescript flags
as an error

	- type assertion asserts it will be an HTMLElement and not null

	- point out creating a react root object based on \<div\> with
id="root"

	- root.render() renders out the element created into the \<div
id="root"- of public/index.html

	- most react web apps will render out this \<div\>

	- run web app

	- inspect element on "Hello World" in browser dev tools and point out
element in \<div id="root"\>

	- let's stylize our message

	- recall all assets must be imported for webpack to bundle them

	- add to top of index.tsx:

**import \'./index.css\';**

	- Hello World is now styled somewhat

	- let's add a new style class for our message -- add to index.css:

.hello-style {

color:#194970;

font-size: 40px;

font-weight: bold;

font-family: \"Courier New\";

}

	- add setting to second argument of React.createElement():

{id:\"title\", className:\"hello-style\"},

	- point out class="hello-style" attribute added to \<div\> in inspect
element

	- run web app

	- can do this through code as well without CSS using React inline
styles

	- add to index.tsx:

let helloStyle:Object = {

color:\"#194970\",

fontSize: \"40px\",

fontWeight: \"bold\",

fontFamily: \"Courier New\"

};

	- modify setting to second argument of React.createElement():

{id:\"title\", style:helloStyle },

	- run web app

JSX AND INTERPOLATION

- a lot of work to add a single HTML element to the web app

- what if we wanted to add:

\<div\>\<div\>Hello World!\</div\>\<div\>From Sean
Morrow\</div\>\</div\>

- would need to create three elements using the same approach

- gets really cumbersome and not scalable!

- JSX (JavaScript Extension) provides an easy definition of HTML
elements

- is syntactical sugar to make it easier -- still does all the
React.createElement() under the hood

- demo to students with src/index.tsx:

	- comment out previous element assignment and replace:

const element:JSX.Element = \<div\>\<div id=\"title\"
style={helloStyle}\>{message}\</div\>\<div\>From
{name}\</div\>\</div\>;

	- the result of JS in { } will be rendered out into the HTML element

	- what is contained in { } must have a result of some sort like an
expression or a call to a method that returns a value, etc.

	- the use of { } to inject data into the HTML elements is called
interpolation

	- run web app

	- to comment in JSX use a JS comment within interpolation:

{/\* ... \*/}

	- interpolation can contain math expressions as well (has a result)

	- to demo again add another \<div\> to JSX:

\<div\>{2 + 2 + 5}\</div\>

	- run web app

OUTPUTTING WITH MAP METHOD

- suppose we want the individual letters of name variable displayed on
the page

- demo to students with src/index.tsx:

	- add to top below name variable declaration:

let letters:string\[\] = name.split(\"\");

	- point out Typescript datatype for array of string (written same as
Java)

	- comment out previous element assignment and replace:

const element:JSX.Element = \<div style={helloStyle}\>{letters}\</div\>

	- no visual change - React renders each array element to the page

	- inspect element to see what is rendered

	- what if want each letter on a separate line -- need each letter
wrapped with a \<div\>\</div\>

	- comment out previous element assignment and replace:

const element:JSX.Element = \<div style={helloStyle}\>

{letters.map((letter:string) =- {

return \<div\>{letter}\</div\>

})}

\</div\>;

	- point out using letter array's map() method

	- map() loops through each element of the array and calls a callback
for each element (common pattern in JS)

	- callback has single argument which is value of each element

	- what that function returns becomes the new value of the element

	- method "maps" new values onto each element -- hence the name

	- map() returns a new modified array which is then rendered onto the
web app page

	- is used heavily in React for outputting a collection of data

	- point out could do callback with an anonymous function instead of
arrow:

{letters.map(function(letter:string){

return \<div\>{letter}\</div\>

})}

	- point out datatype on argument of anonymous function is string

	- technically do not need to include in Typescript as it knows based
on array is an array of string

	- could be written as:

{letters.map((letter) =- { ...

	- point out cannot use forEach() as it returns undefined and not new
array

	- interpolation requires some sort of a value/result to render

	- run web app

	- point out unique "key" warning in browser console -- will address
later

	- add below map() statement:

\<div\>Number of letters: {letters.length}\</div\>

	- run web app

	- recall arrow functions can condense down if contains only one
statement

	- can get rid of { } and return keyword since will automatically
return the result of statement

	- comment out previous element assignment and replace:

const element:JSX.Element = \<div style={helloStyle}\>

{letters.map((letter:string) =- \<div\>{letter}\</div\>)}

\<div\>Number of letters: {letters.length}\</div\>

\</div\>;

CHALLENGE : Practise with Typescript

- over the past two lessons we developed and worked with the
quoteGenerator web app. This app heavily leveraged the power of our old
Toolkit.js script

- this is a really useful script and we want to keep using it with our
future React web apps -- but it is written with Vanilla JS!

- your challenge is to convert Toolkit.js to typescript

- Don't Panic! Remember that TypeScript is Javascript, but with strict
datatyping -- you only need to add datatypes to all variables and all
function arguments

- note that datatypes are not required for data function returns as
Typescript can determine this automatically based on data returned

- also remember that this script does not work with JSX in any way, so
the new script will be called Toolkit.ts (with a TS extension)

CHALLENGE : A Peek into Conditional Rendering

- Conditional Rendering is rendering out different blocks of JSX
depending on a conditional expression

- To do this, embed a ternary expression into your JSX -- for example:

\<div\>

{\[conditional expression\] ? \[render this out if true\] : \[render
this out if false\]}

\</div\>

- your challenge is to try this out with our lesson sample

- the /hello-world web app currently displays all the letters of your
first and last name on a separate line, but where is the space? If you
look at the source in your browser you will see it is being rendered in
as a \<div\> \</div\>, but this is ignored by the browser

- adjust this web app so that every space in your name is rendered as a
"-"

- for example, mine would be:

S

E

A

N

\-

M

O

R

R

O

W

- see /hello-world for solution

**Materials and Equipment**

- /hello-world

- Toolkit.js (PROVIDED)

- Toolkit.ts

- Dockerfile (PROVIDED)

- docker-compose.yml (PROVIDED)
